Recently I have completed my Ph.D. in Technology (Robotics) from the University of Wales, Newport (UWN) and currently working at UWN's Cognitive Robotics Research Centre.  In 2007, I received my Masters degree in Human Computer Interaction & Robotics from Korea Institute of Science & Technology, South Korea. During my Masters, I studied graduate-level courses on Artificial Intelligence and Intelligent Control which included knowledge-representation, reasoning, searching, semantic web,  artificial neural networks, fuzzy-logic and other soft computing techniques. As a part of Masters course project, I used Protege-OWL ontology editor, Racer reasoner and Intel UPnP device authoring tools to create an intelligent LEGO home application. Inspired from this study, I learned more on knowledge representation in XML/RDF and logic programming in Prolog/Hi-Log, CORAL and FuzzyCLIPS. One of the major focuses of my PhD study was integration of heterogeneous software components using flexible inter-process communication technology. Here I learned and applied all major aspects of software development including efficient program design, coding, debugging, testing, source-code management and documentation.
I have more than 5 years experience in academic research and industrial jobs. From 2002 to 2005 I was appointed as Network/Project Engineer in several national and internationally collaborated e-Learning projects by the Institute of Information & Communication Technology, Bangladesh University of Engineering & Technology. Here I was involved in the coordination and management of the project called “Computerization of Bakhrabad Gas Systems Limited (a national gas distribution company located in the southern part of Bangladesh)”.  For about two years, I also worked part-time for two  Internet service providers (ISP) in Bangladesh as Linux system administrator and as systems engineer.
Since 1999, I am an open-source developer and Linux administrator. I have been awarded the prestigious Google's summer-of-code open-source software development sponsorship twice (in 2010 competition, acceptance rate was 18% out of 5,539 total applicants). In 2010, I was mentored by a cryptographic expert and successfully developed a decentralized introduction scheme for Tahoe-LAFS and gained experiences in test-driven development under Python. I also volunteer code to several open-source projects including Tahoe-LAFS, BlueZ, SwisTrack and E-puck. 
From 2005 to 2007, I worked as a postgraduate research student at Center for Cognitive Robotics Research, Korea Institute of Science & Technology. Since 2007 I have been working as a EPSRC sponsored PhD student at UWN's    Cognitive Robotics Research Centre. I have a track record of research and publication in the area of swarm intelligence, robotics, knowledge-base systems, information security and related disciplines. I have published my papers in 6 international conferences which include world-leading conference on robotics and swarm robotics (such as IROS 2007, ANTS 2010). I regularly presented my research outcomes in EPSRC project meetings and collaborated with the project partners. I also collaborated with the researchers from École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology  at Lausanne) for multi-robot tracking software developemnt.  During my PhD study, I have developed my independent research capabilities and problem solving skills without requiring any extensive supervision.  

I am proficient in word-processing packages and Internet search, email, PowerPoint presentation and database packages both in Windows and Linux platform. I have been using various open-source software tools extensively for my research and academic purposes. Since they are open source, I often make necessary modifications in source-code to suit my custom needs. I am proficient in producing diagrams, typesetting  and  preparing technical papers and presentations under Linux's dia and Latex packages. I am quite familiar with SQL and  MySQL/phpMyAdmin database handling tools. I have fair knowledge of HTML, PHP, XML and CSS. I have experience in customizing  web-portal using popular content management system like Drupal, Moodle, razorCMS, SkyBlueCanvas. I maintained my personal web-portal  based on razorCMS. I have also experience in customizing blogs and wikis such as GeekLog and Trac. As a part of my previous employment on an e-Learning project I ran a phpBB bulletin board. I know Python very well. Most of the software code written for my PhD works is based on Python and C++. My Google summer-of-code project in 2010 was coded in Python under Twisted/Nevow wedb framework. In my Masters course project I used Protege-OWl ontology editor, Racer reasoner and Java for developing wrapper code. As a part of my professional jobs in Internet service providing companies, I gained experience in web-server administration and network monitoring tools like NINO, MRTG based on SNMP protocol.
Through the EPSRC project collaborators and open-source software communities I gained significant experiences to develop good working relationships with different kinds of people. Particularly I worked under the supervision of two mentors from USA and Brazil as the part of Google summer-of-code project. I often posted my comments and reports to various open source mailing lists and issue tracking websites about outstanding issues. For example, http://tahoe-lafs.org/trac/tahoe-lafs/ticket/68  (my nick is writefaruq) documents my communication with Tahoe-LAFS mentor during the development of  Google summer-of-code 2010 project . As an associate editor in a leading science & technology magazine in Bangladesh, I developed my skill to explain IT issues to non-technical audience. During my PhD study I gained experiences of preparing hardware and software specification and tracking the procurement process till their completion. For example, we purchased 44 robots, several cameras and other hardware worth of about 20k GBP from UK and EU sources. During this process, I developed a nice working relationships with the staffs of my university's IT, Finance and other departments.
In summary, the years of my post-graduate studies and professional service have prepared me well to undertake this challenging role. I am flexible to work and travel as required by the post. I  adopt novel approaches to solve critical problems with little or no supervision. I believe that my diverse experience in dealing with large IT and knowledge-based systems will be very much advantageous to carry out the duties assigned by this post.

In terms of doing research, I am particularly interested to do research on developing a self-organized web-portal where the contents will be self-organized based on several factors, including the requirements and feedback of the users, their level of sensitivity on different contents and urgency of issues determined the NeLI project administrators and partners. This idea is novel and it is inspired by the biological self-organization of social species which I have validated in a multi-robot system in a multi-tasking environment. The major benefits of this idea include i) the increased robustness and adaptability of the web-portal depending on the change of internal (e.g. user-requirements) and external (e.g. infection outbreak) factors, ii) reduced site management overhead and iii) quick identification of user behavioural patters and iv) increased scalability. 
My second research idea is centred around the development of an early warning system based on the communication patterns observed in  biological social systems. As a part of my PhD thesis I had surveyed extensively the communication in biological social systems and I found that emergency communication among species happens in larger communication range using broadcast-like strategies. Analogously if we can monitor the communication range of NeLI users and tagged them according to their importance level it might be possible to get an early insight of any possible infection outbreak.
I hope the above research ideas can be shaped into concrete models and can be implemented and validated using large users of NeLI community.  This, in turn, will help me to continue my future research on AI, semantic web and artificial multi-agent systems. 

Distributed intelligent systems and algorithms laboratory
